Create KIP-0023: Account management with Passkeys (#52)
kadena-io/KIPs: kip-0023.md

accept more algorithms. The `JWK` format allows for the clients constructing
the request to remain blissfully unaware of what algorithm is used by the
authenticator.

_NOTE: Additionally Chainweb Node could provide a new endpoint that describes which_
_algorithms to support, using the [Allow credentials](https://www.w3.org/TR/webauthn-2/#dom-publickeycredentialrequestoptions-allowcredentials)_
_description._

```json
{
  "payload": {
    "exec": {
      "code": string,
      "data": json
    },
  },
  "meta": {
    "chainId": string,
    "creationTime": number,
    "gasLimit": number,
    "gasPrice": number,
    "sender": string,
    "ttl": number
  },
  "networkId": string,
  "nonce": string,
  "signers": [{
    "clist": [{
      "name": string,
      "args": [string|number]
    }],
+   "pubKey": string,
+   "scheme": "ED25519" | "WebAuthn"
  }]
}
```

### Pact Keyset

In Pact the public key should be accepted as part of any keyset.
This allows Smart Contracts to use the registered keysets as any other
keyset. This should not be impacting any smart contracts, other than
more types of public keys being accepted.

_NOTE: A keyset using such a base64 encoded public key might exceed_

> _the current limitations of a principaled acount length for newer algorithms_

Reviewer: There is a simple and straightforward solution here.
IMHO: all keysets that include a JWK key (even with single key) should generate `w:` principals. With `w:`, the principal is the hash of the whole keyset.

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't this impact authorizing a new device?

Author: @CryptoPascal31 that is actually a pretty nice idea, the hashing would indeed solve the length problem right away (though I don't think anyone would ever create a `k:` account based on a webauthn key. Reason being that by doing so, you would immediately lock your account to a single domain. 

I believe this would mostly be used for `c:` or `w:` accounts.

    , 'pred : 'keys-all
    }
  }
)
(enforce-keyset (read-keyset 'ks))
```

## Registration flow

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
  actor User
  participant WebAuthn(Device)
  participant WalletA.com
  participant WebAuthn(SC)
  participant Fungible(SC)

  User->>+WalletA.com: I'd like to create an account named "Alice"
  WalletA.com->>+WebAuthn(SC): What is the "c:account" for "Alice"?
  WebAuthn(SC)-->>-WalletA.com: That would be "c:capabilityguardforalice"
  WalletA.com->>+WebAuthn(Device): Please give me a public key for Alice, c:capabilityguardforalice
  WebAuthn(Device)->>+User: Please approve this request
  User-->>-WebAuthn(Device): I approve this request
  WebAuthn(Device)-->>-WalletA.com: Here is the public key: abc000
  WalletA.com->>+WebAuthn(Device): Here is the transaction to register, please sign
  WebAuthn(Device)->>+User: Please approve this transaction
  User-->>-WebAuthn(Device): I approve this transaction
  WebAuthn(Device)-->>-WalletA.com: Here is the signature for the transaction
  WalletA.com->>+WebAuthn(SC): Please register "Alice" with this public key
  WebAuthn(SC)->>+Fungible(SC): Create an account for "c:capabilityguardforalice"
```

> 

Reviewer: I have a very important concern: 
How do you prevent front-running here?
How do you prevent an attacker to impersonate Alice, by registering his own key to the SC just before  Alice ?

Reviewer 2: This is the well known "squatting" issue in that plagued accounts before the introduction of 'k:' accounts

Reviewer 3: This is indeed known and something that hasn't been fully hashed out yet. But thank you for the reply 👍🏽

Author: @CryptoPascal31 Yes this indeed is a problem that we already have some idea's around solving. The `alice` alias is used out of convenience reasons, but we already have a PoC running that targets this problem. (Keeping the convenience, but eliminating the squatting problem)

Reviewer 4: could you please elaborate how it would be solved?

Author: @trendzetter definitely! The "squatting" problem is a bit overloaded with different attack vectors. So I'll address the 3 major concerns we have considered within the team.

### High gas fee steal
This attack vector revolves around stealing an account just before someone wants to register an account by submitting a registration with a different guard with a higher gas fee, resulting in the account ending up belonging to the attacker.
To solve this @enobayram has though of a neat solution. He suggested to implement the registration process using `defpact`, where in the first step you'd provide a hashed value of what you want to register, i.e. your vanity name and guard. In the second step where the account would be minted, you would provide all the data which will be validated against the hash provided in step one. 

### Multi chain registration
Because a vanity account has no link to it's guard, the account could have different guards on different chains. This is normally resolved using `principal named accounts`. However this reduces the convenience of an easy to remember name. 
@javadkh2 has brought up an idea to allow vanity accounts without the above mentioned risk. To solve this problem, we limit on what chain an account can be minted. The minted guards, can only be copied to other chains. To prevent all accounts to be minted on one chain, we suggest to convert the vanity name to an integer and modulo it over the amount of chains we have active currently. The result of that formula is the chain it is allowed to be minted on. I'll leave this up to this point, but we also already have a way to scale up to over 20 chains and how to take care of that. That will likely be a different KIP.

### Pre registration
Then offcourse similar to domain registrations, we will have a group of names that will be very high in demand. Those names could very easily be hogged by a single person. So this could be mitigated in many different ways. You could think of authority based registration, staking, payment, rental, list goes on. 

All the above factors suggestions however are not directly a problem related to WebAuthn. The WebAuthn KIP therefor doesn't really go in depth for this specific problem. Though we do believe that it will provide for a lot of convenience for users and therefor we are already working on several PoC's around those topics. 

Does that take away the concerns with regards to the vanity accounts? cc: @trendzetter @CryptoPascal31 @raduciobanu22

Reviewer: Thank you for the answer. Two remarks:

- For the 2 steps registration, don't forget to impose at the SC level a minimum number of blocks between the 2 steps. Otherwise, it's still vulnerable. A good example is the ENS registration.

- I don't understand why do you want to spread accounts minting on several chains... Why not just define a single minting chain. ?

Reviewer 2: @EnoF Thanks for the explanation! Please check the following scenario, in case I missed something:
I send the step 2 of the defpact, at that point it's visible which account I want to mint. A squatter could then decide he wants to take that account so sends the step 1 tx together with a bunch of spam txs that fill in the block so my step 2 tx isn't mined. Then in the next block, because he sends step 2 with higher gas than I did and he'll mint my account and my tx will fail.

Reviewer: > @EnoF Thanks for the explanation! Please check the following scenario, in case I missed something: I send the step 2 of the defpact, at that point it's visible which account I want to mint. A squatter could then decide he wants to take that account so sends the step 1 tx together with a bunch of spam txs that fill in the block so my step 2 tx isn't mined. Then in the next block, because he sends step 2 with higher gas than I did and he'll mint my account while my step 2 tx will fail.

I think we are on the same wavelength @raduciobanu22. This is exactly the issue I tried to mitigate by enforcing a minimum number of blocks between the 2 steps. It makes this attack a lot harder to conduct and more expensive.

Author: > * I don't understand why do you want to spread accounts minting on several chains... Why not just define a single minting chain. ?

Security wise you are absolutely right in that minting on a single chain suffice the use case. The reason for a spread of chain minting is for scalability. With the main idea that any process that can happen on any chain could be "automatically" distributed cross the 20 (or however many chains we have in the future).

With that said, for this specific use case for WebAuthn, it might be even simpler to omit the vanity accounts all together and create a `k:account` based on the first device. Since once your account lives, you could copy over guards from one chain to another, allowing your account to be minted on other chains while your initial device is lost. As long as you have added a second device to your account.

From a user point of view they already have a way to recognize the account by providing a display name. This however loses the ability to share `aliases` with other users, but that is not within the scope of this KIP.

Reviewer: > Security wise you are absolutely right in that minting on a single chain suffice the use case. The reason for a spread of chain minting is for scalability. With the main idea that any process that can happen on any chain could be "automatically" distributed cross the 20 (or however many chains we have in the future).

I'm not sure, it will really help to scale. Because anyway, you will need to submit a transaction to paste the transaction on the chain of interest. And it's not obvious that the "paste transaction" will use much less gas than the initial registration transaction. (I don't even mention that some will refuse to register on chain 13 :smile: )

Reviewer: > With that said, for this specific use case for WebAuthn, it might be even simpler to omit the vanity accounts all together and create a `w:account` based on the first device. Since once your account lives, you could copy over guards from one chain to another, allowing your account to be minted on other chains while your initial device is lost. As long as you have added a second device to your account.

Why ? Your proposal with 2 steps registration procedure should work... At the condition of :
- enforcing a minimum of blocks between two steps (eg 10)
- enforcing on the client side (but maybe on the SC as well) a minimum gas price (eg 1e-3) for the second step.

This would be a great example of leveraging defpacts and commitment/reveal schemes to handle vanity account registration.

FYI : I've just checked. For the ENS registration, they enforce a minimum of 60s (= 5 blocks) between the 2 transactions. At the current gas price, it would cost for an attacker roughly $5000 to front-run and steal an Ethereum name.

Author: @CryptoPascal31 the vanity account can still be implemented, but should be done via a separate KIP as WebAuthn does not strictly rely on that concept. 

Also taking into consideration the user experience for first time blockchain users, I'd rather focus on a fast and smooth registration process. So registering the initial device as a `keys-any` resulting in a `w:account` should satisfy both the security and speed of registration. 

The vanity account can be implemented on top of this account, or even as a different smart contract. I agree that it would be very nice to have and we'll definitely be looking into this. (already have PoC's running for this)

Reviewer 2: > @CryptoPascal31 @raduciobanu22 what do you think about using `w:accounts` based on the initial device?
@EnoF w: account is indeed a good option that solves both the security and ux issue. How about adding a 2nd device? That'd imply rotating the keyset and there were discussions about removing this from `w:` accounts

Reviewer 2: > FYI : I've just checked. For the ENS registration, they enforce a minimum of 60s (= 5 blocks) between the 2 transactions. At the current gas price, it would cost for an attacker roughly $5000 to front-run and steal an Ethereum name.

@CryptoPascal31 Did the same math on Kadena? I think the amount is quite affordable :-)

Author: @raduciobanu22 Adding a second device on this the webauthn account would not impact the `w:account` name. Simply because we only use the `w:account` to verify initial creation only. That means that if you want to mint your account on a new chain, you could choose to use the initial device (resulting in the same `w:account`) or you could initiate a `defpact` from one of the already existing accounts to copy the guard from one chain to another. 

The guard look up would just look up an array of registered devices(guards) and enforce one of them (or multiple depending on what the contract describes).

WebAuthn signatures, key pairs are stored directly on a secure enclave on the
user's own devices. Storing keys in this way prevents the private key from being
exposed or lost. In addition, Kadena SpireKey prompts users to sign for every
transaction, providing greater security, transparency, and control.

Similarly, mnemonic phrases are difficult to store securely and easy to lose.
With support for WebAuthn signatures, Kadena SpireKey enables users to securely
generate and store key pairs directly on their own hardware devices, without
needing to remember or store a mnemonic phrase. The key pairs stored on devices
can typically be accessed using biometric authentication—like Touch ID or Face
ID—allowing users to log in and sign transactions without passwords.
Additionally, WebAuthn has a convienient service provided to sync the key pairs
to the cloud, in the form of `Passkeys`. This service allows users to make use
of any `Passkey Provider` of their choice, removing the reliance on big
corporations to store key pairs.

# Specifications

This section provides technical specifications for the implementation of this
proposal.

## Account creation

> The `coin` contract removed the ability to rotate keysets since `v6`. This

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The `coin` contract removed the ability to rotate the governance predicate (e.g. a keyset) associated with a principal account since `v6`. This
```

---
KIP: "0023"
Title: WebAuthn signatures for Chainweb and Pact
Author: Andy Tang @EnoF, Eileen Guo @eileenmguo
Status: Draft
Type: Standard
Category: Interface
Created: 2023-10-27
---

# Abstract

We propose leveraging WebAuthn signatures as an alternative to ED25519
signatures for creating passwordless accounts and approving transactions
processed through Chainweb Node and Pact smart contracts.

# Motivation

The current user experience for creating an account and signing transactions can
be challenging for users unfamiliar with blockchain technology:

- The concept of public / private keypairs is not widely understood.
- Wallets often generate a 12-24 word mnemonic phrase that users need to store
  securely in addition to a traditional password.

Moreover, the security of accounts generated through many existing wallets is
centralized because the user's key pairs are generated and stored by the wallet
provider. If the wallet provider becomes unavailable or is compromised, users

> may lose access to their assets.

Reviewer: Are you serious, sir ?

Author: No this paragraph is inaccurate and is being rewritten.
